the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
and now I just want to revisit when we
started the unit we listed a bunch of
things that affected the rates of
reaction and we see where we are we've
talked about mechanism we've talked
about the nature of the material the
Iranian intends on the nature of the
material the activation energy barrier
depends on the nature of the reactants
of the material concentrations and
pressure partial pressures temperatures
the only thing we haven't talked about
are catalysts
so that's what we're going to focus on
today we're going to learn about
catalysts and how they affect kinetics
so a catalyst this is something that's
used by non scientists a lot of laymen
talk about catalyzing something there's
many companies with the name catalyst in
it so a catalyst is a substance this is
its technical definition that will speed
up a reaction but it is not itself
consumed by the reaction it doesn't
undergo any permanent change so it can
be thought of as sort of a helping hand
lift up it makes the reaction go faster
but it does not appear in the overall
balanced equation because it's not being
transformed it's not being converted to
something else
it's just speeding up the reaction okay
so now let's go back to our reaction
coordinate diagrams and think about what
a catalyst is doing so back again
potential energy versus the reaction
coordinate we have the potential energy
of our reactants up here potential
energy of our products here Delta e the
difference between them but again before
the reactants can go on to products they
must overcome an activation energy
barrier so EA for the forward direction
and if they're going from products to
reactants they don't have to just do
that they have to go way up here first
and this is the activation energy
barrier without a catalyst the
transition state the
activated complex that's the height to
which the molecules need to get in
potential energy to be able to react and
go on so we can draw now our curve so
from reactants we go up overcome that
barrier reach this state and then can go
on to products so they come together and
you end up at a lower potential energy
in this case but before you get there
you have to overcome this activation
energy barrier okay so this is the
diagram we've seen before what is a
catalyst doing so what the catalyst does
is it decreases this barrier so now we
have a dashed line for the barrier with
a catalyst and we can draw a new curve
over here
so you don't have to get as high you
don't have as large a barrier anymore
and we can put in the new barriers so in
dashed lines now we have the activation
energy barrier for the forward direction
and the activation energy barrier for
the reverse direction both of them are
less this line is below the catalyst has
lowered the activation energy barrier
they typically act by reducing the
barrier both for the forward direction
and the reverse direction so we can also
say in people do that catalysts
stabilize or lower the energy of this
transition state also known as the
activated complex so they bring this
down they lower the energy needed it's
easier to get over the hump when you
have a catalyst and therefore it speeds
up the reaction so catalysts have no
effect on the thermodynamics of the
system there are affecting the kinetics
of the system and this is because free
energy our friend Delta G is a state
function it's independent of path okay
with these things in mind tell me with a
clicker question what happens
to the equilibrium constant if you have
a catalyst present
all right ten more seconds
and that is true it is not changed so
the equilibrium constant is not changed
by the presence of a catalyst because
this is a thermodynamic property so
Delta G has not changed and the
equilibrium constant is not changed so
it doesn't depend on path and this is a
path difference the catalyst changes the
path but it doesn't change the beginning
state or the end state and so just to
help you remember this I'll give you a
little a little trick to remember this
so again catalysts affect the kinetics
not the thermodynamics and one way to
remember this is that the Chinese symbol
for catalysts and marriage broker are
the same so a marriage broker increases
the rate at which a couple comes
together usually introduces the two
people to each other of course online
services can do this as well
but none of these things can make a
couple stable if the couple is not
stable so online dating services
marriage brokers increase the kinetics
increase the rate at which people meet
increase the encounter but do not change
the thermodynamics of the relationship a
couple of stable or unstable regardless
of the marriage broker regardless of the
catalyst so FEX kinetics not
thermodynamics all right so there are
two major types of catalysts homogeneous
catalysts and that is just when the
catalysts and the reactants are in the
same phase an example that has actually
been in the news a bit this fall is the
ozone layer depletion of the ozone by
chlorofluorocarbons all in the gas phase
so this would be the catalyst for the
dissolution of
the depletion is in the same phase as a
thing it's depleting and here's a little
picture of the increase in the ozone
hole over time but there was some good
news this fall that it seemed like the
rate of increase was not as dramatic
that it was staying a little bit more
level which is exciting to know that if
we stop bad behavior that we can we can
have a positive effect so we shouldn't
just say oh we've polluted so much
already what's a little more we've
already done all the damage there's no
no point no no there is a point if we
stop doing damage good thing better
things will happen so that was some good
news that people were hearing about this
fall okay along the pollution lines of
destroying our planet
there's also heterogeneous catalysts so
a different phase and the common example
of this is the catalytic converter in a
car and so catalytic converters use
metals solid phase to help catalyze
reactions of gases so solid gas
different phase and they try to convert
these gases to less less toxic
pollutants and so I'll just give you a
little example of how this could work a
not a catalytic converter but just in
general with this little movie so we
have this metal surface here and the
metal surface will absorb h2 gas and
help to dissociate h2 so here's a
hydrogen here's a hydrogen absorbed onto
this metal surface and then you can flow
something over the metal surface and and
that will be reduced by the hydrogen's
so let me let me get this to go so here
we see now the hydrogen's are popping
off and going to reduce at the N over
here so this is an example of a
heterogeneous catalyst where we have
metal in a solid phase that's catalyzing
a reaction that involves materials in a
different phase okay so two types
but there is also my very very favorite
type which is enzymes so we're going to
talk just briefly about enzyme catalysis
which will give you a leg up when you go
on to courses that have something to do
with biochemistry and these days
biochemistry is sort of everywhere on
campus you might think I can escape
biology to go to Chemical Engineering no
no you can't there are a lot of chemical
engineers that are working only with
enzymes so a little bit about enzymes is
catalyst so enzymes large protein
molecules to 20,000 grams per mole or
more that's a tiny protein and they're
made up of amino acids and you've seen a
lot of amino acids in this class we've
been using those to think about PK's and
so here we have an amino acid with a
side chain as abbreviated R there's 20
different R's 20 different amino acids
and amino acids come together forming
peptide bonds where we have a connection
between this carbonyl and the nitrogen
of the next amino acid so amino acid one
amino acid two and here's the peptide
bond these then form long chains and
will fold up into a compact structure so
here is an example of a structure of an
enzyme and I'll just tell you a little
bit about this enzyme so here there are
four polypeptide chains so one in green
one in red one in yellow and one in blue
and they form this compact structure and
this picture shows these ribbons
here's alpha helixes they're squiggly
the arrows or beta strands and so they
draw ribbons through the Alpha carbon
position so you don't see all the atoms
here you just kind of see how the chains
wrap around each other to form this
overall protein structure so this
particular enzyme catalyzes the last
step in the biosynthesis of an
antibiotic fosfomycin so it converts
this reactant or
substrate molecule into the fosfomycin
antibiotic fosfomycin is used in
combination therapy to treat MRSA
infections so I've always tried to give
you examples of important areas of
science that smart people should go into
and solve these problems and I'll just
mention antibiotic resistance with this
figure this was published in the journal
Nature they called it a perfect storm
because here we see the increase in
antibiotic resistant strains this is
mersa here up to 60% over here and these
are the state is old and then that goes
up and here in blue going down are the
new antibiotics that have been approved
for use so we have much more resistance
and many fewer antibiotics being
approved and so this is what was been
called the perfect storm in this
situation the lie data here 2010 it's
not any better in fact it's worse now so
one important area is to come up with
new antibiotics all right so many of the
targets of antibiotics or enzymes many
of the ways to make antibiotics is using
enzymes and so enzyme catalysis is very
important for medicine and also for
engineering and biofuels and people are
using enzymes for pretty much everything
these days alright so a couple of
terminology reactants we've been talking
about reactants if it's an enzyme it's
called substrate these terms can really
be used enter interchangeably the
substrate will bind to what's known as
the active site on an enzyme and so as
someone who determines three-dimensional
structures of enzyme it pains me to draw
a picture of an enzyme structure like
this but I did it anyway so here's my
enzyme that's its active site here is
the substrate molecule which is about
the same size it's the enzyme usually
that's not the case but anyway binding
and so then when you have enzyme plus
substrate bind together we have our es
complex es for enzyme substrate and then
the enzyme will undo catalysis forming
product and product will be released and
will have free enzyme again so this is a
very simple mechanism or steps of enzyme
catalysis but that's okay it sometimes
can be written in a very simple way and
so now using what you have already
learned how to do in our reaction
mechanism we can derive rate laws and
rate expressions for enzymes so you know
biochemistry is really not much
different than anything else we've been
doing all the things you've been
learning in chemistry applied to
biochemistry biochemistry or life is
really just a series of chemical
reactions that abay all of the same laws
and principles as everything else so
here you're going to write an expression
for the enzyme coming together with its
substrate forming an intermediate enzyme
substrate complex and going on to form
free enzyme and product in step one
enzyme and substrate will come together
and in the forward direction we have k1
to form the enzyme complex and there's
also it's also a reversible step in step
two the complex goes on to form enzyme
and product so we can now write these
laws or I should say you can figure out
how to write these expressions these are
again elementary steps elementary
reactions
all right ten more seconds
okay let's just take a look at that
so over here again the rate of the
forward direction we have the forward
rate constant k1 times enzyme times
substrate and for the reverse direction
it's K minus 1 times our intermediate es
so now that you how those are done you
can tell me you can just yell it out
what am I going to put for this rate k2
times es all right so we can always from
an elementary step or elementary
reaction write the rate law just based
on the stoichiometry using our rate
constants and and our reactants here or
for the reverse direction here and then
we can write the overall rate at which
product is being formed so the rate of
product formation we can write it from
the slow step or from our last step if
we don't know anything about slow steps
so the rate at which product is formed
can be expressed as DP DT the change in
product over time and you can also write
it by the rate law for the second step
k2 times es but we're not done because
es is an intermediate it's formed in the
first step and consumed in the second
step and so it's an intermediate so we
now have to solve for es in terms of
rate constants products and reactants so
how are we going to do this and why
don't you tell me how we do this and
again this is the change in es over time
so asking for the rate of change of the
intermediate over time
all right ten more seconds
okay yep so if you remember back to the
mechanism lecture you can solve for es
by looking at the rate at which es is
formed the rate at which its decomposed
and the rate at which it's consumed so
the rate of formation is the forward
direction of the first step minus the
rate at which it decomposes which is the
back direction of the first step so we
have plus k1 e times s minus K minus 1
times the intermediate concentration and
then minus the consumption minus k2
times es so we put all those steps
together and then we need to use the
steady-state approximation to solve take
this to solve for es so again the
steady-state approximation says that the
rate at which an intermediate formed
equals the rate at which the
intermediate goes away or the net rate
is 0 so that is again the steady-state
approximation and they use that in
enzyme kinetics as well as pretty much
every problem you have in reaction
mechanisms from that's going to be on
the final
alright so using that steady-state
approximation we can just take this
expression that we just talked about and
set it equal to zero and that will allow
for us to solve for our intermediate
which is in this case es so we set that
whole thing in to 0 all right so this so
far is exactly the same as you would do
any problem in reaction mechanisms but
now because it's enzymes there is a
slight difference so a slight difference
and that is that instead of solving for
es in terms of e our free enzyme we want
to solve for es in terms of the total
concentration of enzyme e to this zero
or Oh over here so total enzyme
equals free enzyme plus bound enzyme
because your enzymes either free or
bound it only has two options and so
that's your total enzyme and the reason
why we want to do this is practical we
don't necessarily know if we're studying
or its reaction how much of our enzyme
is free and how much is bound but if
we're good scientists we know how much
enzyme we put into our experiment so
total enzyme if we can solve for things
or do things in terms of total enzyme
that makes our life much easier so it's
a very practical reason so what we can
do now is replace e which is our free
enzyme with our total enzyme minus our
bound enzyme so that's what we're going
to do I'm going to put back those
expressions we just had so we this was
the clicker question then we set it
equal to zero and now we have this e
term here we want to get rid of that
because we don't know how much of our
enzyme is free but we do know how much
we put in our total so we're going to
place this e with total enzyme minus
bound enzyme so we have a k1 now instead
of times e we have x e0 times our
substrate and then we have this es term
so minus k1 again es times substrate and
then we have these two terms we just put
those down here okay so now we're back
now we want to solve for the
intermediate yes and we'll solve for
that intermediate yes in terms now of
total enzyme all right so now we need to
do some rearrangement just putting that
expression up here that we just saw and
now we're going to rearrange our es
terms everything with an es to one side
of the equation and then solve for it so
we have all of our es terms on one side
we move that one we move this one we
move that one and on the other side we
just have this term with k1 total enzyme
and substrate now we can pull out the es
terms so yes is here we have k1 times
substrate K minus 1 K 2
and then this term over here k1 total
enzyme substrate now we divide and we
get this term over here so now we've
solved for es one more change there is a
constant that's easy to measure called
the Michaelis Menten constant and we
want to now introduce this term big K m
and this term is equal to K minus 1 plus
k2 over k1 now we want to get this new
constant Michaelis Menten constant into
this expression because it's easy to
measure again practical so let's do that
so here is this km term again and we
want this km term to appear in this
solution to our intermediate we have K
minus 1 here k2 like that but there's no
k1 underneath it so let's put one there
so what we're going to do is we're gonna
divide by K 1 so we'll divide the top
term by K 1 we'll divide divide this k1
s term by k1 and we'll divide K minus 1
plus k2 by k1 and we do that because
then we can get our big km in here all
right so with all of these dividing by K
ones we can simplify this expression and
so we'll do that so we'll cancel those K
ones we can cancel these K ones and then
we can get this our total enzyme
concentration times substrate /
substrate concentration + km because
that term equals km and now we're happy
because we can measure km and we know
how much total enzyme we put in so we
just solved for our intermediate in
terms of things we can actually measure
but we're not done this is just the
expression for our intermediate now we
have to put it back into our rate law so
let's do that
almost done here's our expression for
our intermediate the rate of product
formation the change in product over
time equals k2 times yes this
intermediate now we can plug that in to
that term and do that and we get this
expression which is known as the
Michaelis Menten equation k2 times total
enzyme times substrate over substrate
times a plus km and let me just show you
some pictures of mod Minton and
mckaela's so Michaelis was a professor
in Germany and he was Jewish and he had
a bit of a rocky career and was
encouraged to do things that perhaps no
one cared about that much like study
enzymes or something and he worked with
mod Menten who was Canadian so mod
Minton couldn't find a faculty position
in Canada at the time so she got a
position in the u.s. at University of
Pittsburgh Michaelis decided Germany was
not a good place to be and ended up in
New York City at Rockefeller University
mod Menten although she published an
enormous number of papers and really
Michaelis Menten kinetics is one of the
most famous things if you ask a
biochemist one thing that everyone will
know about is Michaelis Menten kinetics
she was not promoted to full professor
until she was 70 years old despite the
fact that she had accomplished more than
most anybody else and then she retired
at 71 years of age so she was a full
professor for one year before she
retired but Michaelis had a rough time
too and didn't get his kind of position
that was was worthy of his
accomplishments until he was in his 50s
because of being a German Jew so both of
them had a pretty rocky career but they
were two of the most prominent figures
really in biochemistry setting kind of
we still use Michaelis Menten kinetics
all the time in biochemistry this is
really pioneering work ok so let me now
show you how to apply the Michaelis
Menten equation to dip
conditions so here we have a plot change
in product so the rate at which product
is being formed versus our substrate
concentration so as we at low substrate
concentrations down here there's a very
fast change in the amount of product
that's being produced per time so at low
substrate concentration when you add
more substrate it increases the rate
significantly and this is because
there's a lot of free enzyme so there's
enzyme just waiting around to catalyze a
reaction you give it more substrate you
get more product quickly but this levels
off up here and at high substrate
concentration adding more substrate
doesn't really help the rate any it's
leveling off and that's because all the
active sites already filled so adding
more substrate doesn't make it any
faster you need to form product and
release it for substrate to bind and so
this all the active sites are filled the
rate levels off so this is the behavior
that you observe when typical Michaelis
Menten kinetics are in play so now let's
think about those two conditions again
or two conditions one at high substrate
concentration and one in this range here
so going back to our equation when
substrate concentration is much greater
than km and I'm going to define km for
you other than the rate constants in a
minute so when that is true we can look
at the Michaelis Menten equation and
just think about what happens if this
substrate concentration is way way
bigger than K M so km then is much much
smaller than substrate and it kind of
doesn't matter so it's very small and we
can ignore it and if we cancel out km
then we can simplify this equation even
further and cancel out our substrates
and we're left with this that the rate
of product formation is just k2 times
our total enzyme and this has a special
name this is called v-max the maximum
velocity of the
so maximum velocity or maximum rate
equals k2 times your total enzyme
concentration so this is one equation
that you'll find on your equation sheet
for the final exam and if we go back for
a second and look at our plot up here we
can now write v-max the maximum velocity
for that particular enzyme concentration
k2 times total enzyme this is the
maximum rate we're going to get so now
let's think about this down here at low
substrate concentrations again and
particularly at a concentration where
substrate equals kin substrate
concentration equals kin
so if substrate concentration and km are
the same thing we can just put an extra
substrate in there km equals substrate
so on the bottom we have two substrate
concentrations now and that allows us to
cancel out our substrates and we're left
with this equation 1/2 k2 times the
total concentration of enzyme which is
the half maximal rate that's half of
v-max fiy max was k2 times total enzyme
this is half of that and this is the
definition of km km is the concentration
of substrate for which the rate is half
maximal so if we go back now to our plot
this is the maximum sub this is the
maximum rate at half of that maximal
rate the substrate concentration equals
km so experimentally you can plot your
data for the formation of product at
various substrate concentrations
calculate v-max and figure out what was
the concentration of substrate when the
rate was half that maximal rate and you
can determine km that's why you want km
in your equation because it's something
that's not that
hard to measure ok so let's apply this
now let's think about an enzyme and
we're told this is enzyme carbonic
anhydrase it catalyze co2 to bicarbonate
which is the buffering system that
happens in your blood the Michaelis
Menten constants for this enzyme we have
km 8 times 10 to the minus 5 molar and a
k2 value of 6 times 5 to the 5th I think
or 6 I don't know I don't have my
glasses for one hopefully you can see
better than me all right
so now with these values calculate the
maximum reaction rate if the enzyme
concentration is this which i think is 5
times 10 to the something molar should
make bigger font
oh it's easier to read on that ok
clicker question
all right ten more seconds
yep so here you just had to say okay if
you had your glasses and I have my now
enzyme concentration times k2 is going
to give you the maximum rate so v-max
equals k2 times enzyme concentration all
right so we can put that down v-max k2
enzyme concentration multiply those out
together and you get the the rate and
it's in molar per second now what about
the concentration of substrate for the
rate to be 1.5 molar per second another
clicker question
all right ten more seconds
Wow okay so what what is this this
number compared to the number we head up
before it's the half maximal rate so
what is the enzyme the substrate
concentration at the half maximal rate
km yep so all you have to do that's the
definition of km is look for the km
value and say that is the substrate
concentration when the rate is half
maximal and so this is the kind of
problem that you'll have that the extra
problems have in them and this this can
be the complete answer you don't have to
show any work for these so a lot of
these problems are just looking for you
to identify what I know what km means so
again that's all you have to do for this
so check out the extra problems on
kinetics they're not really extra there
on enzymes and things reaction
mechanisms that haven't been on a
problem set they will be on the final
exam okay and then we'll talk briefly
about inhibitors clicker competition
Wednesday and we're going to review a
lot of the topics that we've covered on
Wednesday so it's going to be a lot of
fun and our last video all right so
quickly we got to get to our clicker
competition so let's finish
let's finish lecture 34 notes so the
last thing we've been talking about is
one of the most exciting things in
chemistry which is catalysis how do you
speed up reactions but we have to end on
a slow note which is that inhibitors are
the opposite of catalysts and they slow
down reactions and if we're talking
about enzymes which we were doing on
Monday then inhibitors will often bind
to the enzyme e forming an e a complex
and enzyme inhibitor complex and they
often bind in the active site and so
therefore substrate
which we have here the substrate s
cannot bind it's a very simple idea if
you want to design an inhibitor to stop
an enzyme from doing what it's doing and
in fact the pharmaceutical industry is
largely about this designing inhibitors
to bind to key enzymes to stop processes
so often what you do in designing this
you want something that kind of looks
like the substrate but most ideally you
want something that actually resembles
the transition state a transition state
analog to remember catalysts work by
lowering the transition state or
activation energy barriers or activated
complex
so they lower that energy and so
something that resembles the transition
state where bonds are partly broken
partly formed it's not reactants it's
not products it's in the middle those
molecules those analogs of transition
States will bind very tightly and will
block the enzyme from doing its job and
this is really I told you about we had
World AIDS Day I mentioned that one of
the reasons why AIDS is not such a huge
problem in the u.s. anymore it's not a
death sentence anymore is because the
pharmaceutical industry design
transition state analogs targeting HIV
protease and they really work very well
so if we're in the developing world
there's a good regime of pharmaceuticals
that we can take that keep the viral
load low now it's different in other
parts of the world but a lot of the
pharmaceutical industry is about
designing inhibitors for enzymes okay so
we've been talking about catalysis we
talked about kind of like mechanisms
catalyst we talked about effective
temperature all sorts of things and so
we're going to end our catalysis unit
with our final video in the series in
their own words and this is a former
graduate student she actually just
defended I'm talking about her work in
Tony's in ski's laboratory and why why
kinetics are important to a research in
development of biofuels
my name is Gina I'm from Chongqing China
and I'm a third-year graduate student
working in the chemistry and biology
department
my research is uncovered in carbon
dioxide a environmental pollutant into
useful biofuel right now currently we
burn as the nosing heart of gasoline and
ethanol is not an ideal fuel because
it's a shorter chain length and the
combustion of heat is not as high as
longer chain and alcohols also ethanol
traps a lot of water so it comes to lock
your engine when they first find the raw
stone in your trophy they realize that
this organism can store a lot of its
carbon as a polymer chain of esters and
these polyesters when isolated can be
used as biodegradable plastics for my
research and trying to turn this carbon
storage organism into storing the carbon
as biofuels so alcohol that can burn in
our engines to change these organisms
from making bad available plastics to
make biofuels first I have to get rid of
the genes that actually makes the body
beautiful plastics and then find another
pathway to shun the excess carbon into
making biofuels I really have to think
about kinetics because I want my pathway
to go as fast as it can to produce as
much product as possible within a period
of time so there are certain parameters
for cannabis that I can change and
certain parameters that I cannot change
for the parameters that I cannot change
is the temperature because my organism
would not survive under higher
temperature and four parameters that I
can change for example I can change the
enzyme by putting a stronger more
efficient enzyme from another organism
to catalyze the same exact reaction I
can also increase the substrate
concentration by eliminating another
competing pathways for the same
substrate but deleting the gene so hence
making more of the substrate are going
into my product eventually we'll be able
to take the carbon dioxide that's
released as a pollutant and trapa
and use it as a carbon source to make
useful molecules
you